The Project Gutenberg eBook of The twin seven-shooters
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The twin seven-shooters

Author: Charles Frederick Manderson

Release date: December 1, 2025 [eBook #77379]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: F. Tennyson Neely, 1902

Credits: chenzw and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWIN SEVEN-SHOOTERS ***




      The Twin
      Seven-Shooters.

  [Illustration: CHARLES F. MANDERSON
  Colonel 19th Ohio Infantry.
  Brevet Brigadier General Volunteers, U. S. A.]




                        The Twin Seven-Shooters.

                                   BY

                          CHARLES F. MANDERSON

            LATE COLONEL 19TH OHIO VOLUNTEER INFANTRY, BREVET
                     BRIGADIER-GENERAL VOLS., U.S.A.

                             [Illustration]

                            F. TENNYSON NEELY

                  114 Fifth Avenue      96 Queen Street
                      NEW YORK              LONDON




                            Copyright, 1902,
                                   by
                          CHARLES F. MANDERSON,
                                 in the
                              United States
                                   and
                             Great Britain.

                      Entered at Stationers’ Hall,
                                 London.

                          All Rights Reserved.


                       _The Twin Seven-Shooters._




  “_We came into the world like brother and brother,_
  ‘_And now let’s go hand in hand, not one before another._”

        --DROMIO, in “Comedy of Errors.”




INTRODUCTION.


The telling of this truthful story of the Great War comes from the
numerous requests of comrades, who knew somewhat of the presentation,
the capture and the return of the pair of revolvers that came together
after a quarter of a century of separation and after they had been
carried and used under two flags. Their restoration could not have been
had under any other condition than that which came about at the close
of our gigantic struggle.

The Civil War was waged on both the Federal and Confederate sides with
an intensity and manly vigor characteristic of the race that sprang
from the loins of the Puritan and the Cavalier.

The immense hosts that combated upon so many dreadful fields, with
the incident sacrifice of life and limb, while actuated by the desire
to win, by comparison with which individual loss counted as nothing,
were never prompted by personal hatred or ill will. They fought to
obtain the result desired, and when the end came, with its feeling of
exultation by the one and of depression by the other, there was mutual
respect and common consideration, that led naturally to a reunited
country and the placing of the Great Republic in its present position
as the Chiefest of Nations.

The story permits a description of two great battles--that of
Murfreesboro, or Stone’s River, and of Chattanooga, or Mission
Ridge--the first-named one of the hardest fought fields of the War,
and the last, one of the most spectacular. The recital of these calls
for no explanation, and I hope the personal equation of the story needs
no apology.

  CHARLES F. MANDERSON,

    Late Colonel, 19th Regiment Ohio Infantry.
    B’v’t Brig. Gen. Vols., U.S.A.




PROLOGUE.


[Illustration: “RESTING QUIETLY IN THEIR POLISHED CASE OF DARK MAHOGANY
WITH ITS SOFT LINING OF TUFTED CRIMSON SILK.”]

Resting quietly in their polished case of dark mahogany, with its
soft lining of tufted crimson silk, they look harmless indeed and as
though their lives had been uneventful. Yet, could they speak with
other tongues than those of fire and smoke, they could tell a tale to
interest and thrill--of scenes of bloody encounter and deadly strife,
of combat and carnage, of victory and defeat, of raid and destruction,
of pursuit and capture, of loss and recovery, of separation and
reunion,--in short, the exciting story of war, and the captivating tale
of peace.

You take up the pair of revolvers with a new interest. Yes! they are
handsome. Shapely and well proportioned, they deserve your exclamation
of admiration. The blued steel of barrels and cylinders contrasts
attractively with the silver mounting of the handles, so well fitted to
the grasp.

[Illustration: “YOU TAKE THEM IN HAND!

                                           YOU GLANCE ALONG THE SIGHTS!”
]

You take them in hand! You glance along the sights! Ah! my friend, time
was when the threatening glint of the eye that brought these sights
in line was quite different from the gentle light in yours. And now
you read inquiringly the inscription, showing the presentation, deeply
engraved upon the silver handle band of each seven shooter. Yes, I am
the regimental commander to whom they were presented, by the braves of
the gallant 19th Regiment of Ohio Infantry, nearly forty years ago. I
had lived but little over half that many years, when they came to me
and, since the date you read upon them, I have grown grizzled.

The scene of the presentation, the causes that led to it and the after
events of note, are as vivid as though they were of yesterday and yet
there is the strange feeling as though I spoke of some other and not
of myself. I take it that most of us who served through those four
momentous years of gigantic war now feel as though the experiences were
those of a third person, of whom we had knowledge, intimate indeed, but
with whom we had not identity. As you ask for the story, it shall be
given unto you.




CONTENTS.


                         PAGE

  PROLOGUE                  5


            SCENE I.

  The Battle                9


           SCENE II.

  The Presentation         24


          SCENE III.

  The Capture              29


           SCENE IV.

  The Reunion              44


  Epilogue                 51




The Twin Seven-Shooters.




SCENE I.

THE BATTLE.


The recital will start fairly on Christmas day of the year 1862, near
Nashville, in the camps of the Army of the Cumberland, then commanded
by General Rosecrans.

The festive holiday time had increased the usually present disease,
until home-sickness was the all-pervading complaint. As the picket
peered through the gloomy air under the dull, wintry sky, he saw, in
his mind’s eye, the dear ones at home, gathered about the yule-log.
The sentry’s thoughts were far away, as he challenged the approaching
guard, that brought relief, but gave none save in name, and received
the sharp replies, so different from the words of good cheer properly
incident to the time. The men gathered about the camp fires during the
evening hours with abortive attempts at merriment, soon to be given
up, and then to talk in whispers of friends and family and home. The
bugle calls, holding out the promise that balmy sleep might bring
forgetfulness, were welcomed; although tattoo seemed a wail, and
lights-out a sob.

The restless quiet of a great military camp comes at last. A nest of
sleeping souls, it heaves with sound. The sentinels look like stalking
ghosts.

After midnight the dreaming sleepers are disturbed by the clank of the
sabre of the orderly, seeking the headquarters of regiments to deliver
an important order. Be quick! Light the candle stuck in the bayonet
shank at the head of the ground bed where lies the regimental commander.

Ah! Here is a Christmas gift with a vengeance! Read!

  “You will place your command in readiness to march at daylight.
  Move very light--three days’ rations in haversacks and two days’ in
  wagons. Forty rounds of ammunition on each man, with all the reserve
  ammunition in wagons. Take no tents and no baggage.”

A battle order! Up and be stirring, for there is much to be done
before daylight. Sleepers are aroused, their dreams of home and its
festivities rudely disturbed, tents are struck and rolled, and, with
the baggage and surplus stores packed into wagons to be sent within the
earth-works of Nashville.

Reveille finds the Army of the Cumberland, nearly fifty thousand
strong, on the march to attack the Confederates under Bragg at
Murfreesborough, thirty miles away. No holiday march this, I assure
you. The enemy is alert. He harasses our front with artillery, attacks
our flanks with infantry and harries our rear with cavalry. The
elements seem in league with him, for snow, sleet and rain make heavy
roads, at which men swear and in which wagons and artillery flounder
and stall.

Four days of skirmishing and hard marching, with four nights of unrest
and chilly misery bring us to our objective--the enemy. He has selected
his battle ground on the bank of Stone’s River, a swift stream, in
places fordable.

The night of December 30th we slept, or essayed to sleep, upon our
arms, without fires. Never can I forget the dispirited and woe-begone
look of the men as, rising from the frozen ground, they shook
themselves at daylight. The hoar-frost covered them, giving to the
uniforms of blue a new color, resembling somewhat the grey of the foe.
Is there fighting quality in this line of shivering men? Can the battle
fire be kindled in these chilled frames? A cold breakfast from the
haversacks, a tin cup of coffee to each man, a warming drill in the
manual of arms and their appearance is changed for the better.

The order comes! We are to cross Stone’s River at the lower ford and
lead the attack upon the enemy’s right. Rosecrans will strike with his
left.

An inspection of the guns, a distribution of ammunition, filling both
cartridge boxes and haversacks, some words of encouragement and cheer
from the youthful commander, and we move to the river bank, to find
our crossing, by wading the cold stream, unopposed by the enemy. We
form in line of battle upon the other side and are about to advance to
the attack, when the sound of cannon, heard but faintly from our right
a short time ago, becomes louder and more loud. A terrific battle is
raging there and the movement of sound means our men are being driven.
We are halted. There is stir and excitement among the division staff.
We are ordered to recross the river and hasten to the support of the
right wing.

Bragg, actuated by the same motive as Rosecrans, conceiving the same
plan, had attacked our right, but his fresh and sheltered troops struck
their blow at an earlier hour. They doubled our line back upon itself.
They took our straight bar of iron and bent it into a horse-shoe. Our
right flank had become our rear.

Defeat seemed imminent. On our hurried way, the 19th Ohio, leading
Crittenden’s Division, met horses, teams and men in confusion most
confounded. Rousseau, of Kentucky, riding bare-headed, cries to me,
“What troops are these?” and to my answer says, with tearful entreaty
in his voice, “For God’s sake! get quickly to the cedars on our right
and stop this rout.” We hasten on. Rosecrans, pale with anguish of the
thought that Garesche, bosom friend and Chief of Staff, had just been
killed by his side, but determined of purpose and confident in bearing,
says, “Men! you can save the day. Will you do it?” “Aye! Aye! sir; if
mortal men can, we will!”

We pass from the march by the flank into line under the direction of
the Commanding General himself, my regiment forming the right of the
front line.

The grey coats, flushed with success that is so near victory, came
gaily on. We wait until they are within easy range. It is a weary
waiting and hard to endure. Our men are falling rapidly under the fire
of the advancing foe. My favorite mare drops dead with a ball through
her gentle heart. Adjutant Brewer, always alert and devoted replaces
her with his good grey. Rising from the ground, with no great bodily
harm, although I had been pitched headlong, I exclaim: “But, Adjutant,
my glasses are broken into many bits and I see dimly.” “Never mind; I
will see for you,” he quickly responds. And so he did. Gallant fellow!
Brave heart! He gave his young life to his country and his parting
benediction to me afterwards, in a desperate mêlée and fearful
charge.

[Illustration: CHARGE OF GENERAL VAN CLEVE’S DIVISION IN THE CEDARS, AT
THE BATTLE OF STONE’S RIVER, UNDER DIRECTION OF GENERAL ROSECRANS.

The 19th Ohio Infantry forming the right of the front line. Photograph
of a picture made during the war by Private Mathews, of the 31st Ohio
Infantry.]

At last the order to fire! From every musket leaps a missile of death.
The Confederate line wavers! Strong young teeth tear the cartridges. We
load and fire with energy. The grey line breaks! A charge is ordered by
Rosecrans in person. They run! How inspiring! What exhilaration! With
wild yells we rush on. We regain much of the ground lost in the early
morning and hold it fast and firm.

Again the nightfall, the last of the eventful year. What horrid din, of
cannon and of watchful picket’s gun, to disturb and harass the weary
unharmed, who seek to sleep. How cold and miserable the wounded in blue
and grey who groan and moan between the lines, where succor cannot come.

Morn at last! The new year has come. Both armies are so torn and
shattered that the re-forming of lines and watchful rest is a
necessity. The day passes in care for the wounded and hasty burial of
the dead.

Another night, and again the morning. Who will strike the blow?
Rosecrans, tenacious of purpose, returns to his original plan. Again
our division fords Stone’s River in front of the enemy’s right. The
shortened line of each regiment tells the story of the slaughter of the
31st. We wait patiently the order to strike.

The hours pass. Few in number, our division is a tempting bait to
Bragg. General Breckenridge, with a column of many lines, advances
upon us. With precision of movement they march across the open fields.
The sight fascinates us! Splendid spectacle! They break the charm by
opening fire and charging upon us with the shrill yell of the South.
With a crash the lines meet, to mingle a moment and break apart. Our
reserve becomes our front line. We fight for minutes that seem hours,
with bayonet and clubbed musket, with deep cursing and loud yells, with
hot rage and bold defiance, that rarest of happenings in battle comes
to us--a hand to hand fight between lines of infantry upon an open
field. We are overwhelmed by numbers and flanked by the greater force.
Thrice has our color bearer been felled to earth, and of all the color
guard not one is unhurt.

But the regimental flag does not touch the ground. Gallant Phil Reefy,
Lieutenant of Company F, strong and stalwart, bears it aloft. Sullenly
we retreat to the river bank, fighting as we retire. We reach the
stream.

What is that deafening roar? It is as though heaven and earth had come
together. Fifty-two guns, massed by Mendenhall, Chief of Artillery,
commanding the position we had just left, have opened with grape and
canister at short range upon the but now exultant foe. What dreadful
slaughter! Masses of men fall writhing as the missiles hurtle through
the air. They turn and flee, for mortal men cannot withstand such storm.

We pursue until darkness comes, capturing prisoners, guns and stores,
and Reefy, proudly exultant, plants the flag of the 19th Ohio upon two
cannon captured in the tempestuous pursuit.

[Illustration: REPULSE OF THE ATTACK OF THE COLUMN OF GENERAL
BRECKENRIDGE, BEING THE CLOSING SCENE OF THE BATTLE OF STONE’S RIVER.

Made from a picture drawn by Private Mathews, of the 31st Regiment,
Ohio Infantry, during the war.]

No battle of the war shows the dash, pluck, bravery and endurance
of the American soldier better than Stone’s River. The attack, so
spirited and bold, upon the right wing, under McCook, in the gray dawn
of that winter morning, that forced it back until the exultant
enemy was not only on our flank but in our rear! The speedy taking of
new positions by the troops of the left wing, under Crittenden; their
gallant and successful charge in the cedars that regained much of the
ground so ruinously lost!

The sturdy and immovable stand of the center, under Thomas, that
resisted assaults most impetuous and broke the charging columns into
disorganized fragments, as waves are broken on a rock-bound coast! The
dash of the Southerners in attack, the steadiness of the Northerners
in resistance, the impulsive ardor of the one, the deliberate repose
of the other; both so characteristic! The bold front, the confident
daring, the personal exposure, the actual leadership, and the
unconquerable spirit of Rosecrans, that “plucked victory from defeat
and glory from disaster!”

All this, any of this, was worth the sacrifice of life itself to see.

It stands in history as a bright page. The dreadful figures of loss
tell the story of how terribly sanguinary were the engagements when
Americans fought each other. Of 44,000 Federals, 12,000, and of 38,000
Confederates, 10,000 were killed and wounded--over twenty-five per
cent. Recall the fact that at Waterloo, Wellington lost less than
twelve, and at Marengo and Austerlitz, Napoleon lost less than fifteen
per cent.

At daylight the next morning, after the battle, my line was formed.
Shorn was it of half its length, for forty per cent. had fallen. Three
officers were killed and three wounded. Company B, with more of its
own dead to bury than there were unhurt survivors to do them honor.
Ah! the familiar faces gone from us. We who were left looked upon each
other with feelings unknown before. We felt a kinship stronger than
brotherhood, as though we were parts of one body.

We heard read, with infinite satisfaction, of the glory of our
achievements, the congratulations of the General and the thanks of
President Lincoln. We shook hands with each other that we had been
specially mentioned in the reports, and took satisfactory delight that
the commander of the 79th Indiana had officially reported that the good
behavior of his command might be attributed to the splendid conduct of
the 19th Ohio, and to the effect of our example.

We were heroes all, and were proudly conscious of the fact.




SCENE II.

THE PRESENTATION.


The restful weeks following the great battle go slowly by. The ranks
of the regiment fill up from the return of the slightly wounded and
the detached. The white tents about Murfreesborough, placed in regular
rows, form a new city of vast extent. Camp duties, drills, inspection,
review, guard mounting and dress parade fill the busy hours. The
fighting giant is in training for the summer campaign of Tullahoma and
the advance into Georgia.

I recall the afternoon of a perfect day in the early spring time.
Parade over and dismissed, by some preconcerted signal, to me unknown,
the first sergeants do not march the men to quarters, but go to their
positions and company commanders take their places in line. “Attention!
Battalion!” shouts Major Stratton, assuming the command. I look on
somewhat amazed at this sudden devotion to a drill not down in the camp
orders.

The battalion forms square. I am invited to it, and with speech all too
complimentary and feeling reference to the great battle, its losses and
its gains, am presented with the beautiful weapons you here admire.

The surprise is only excelled by my delight with the gift. They shall
be worn with pride, they shall be used in honor.

I cherish them for the sake of the givers, and practice to know how and
to become worthy to use them. They stand me in good stead very often,
and familiarity with them does not breed contempt of their power.

Months go by. The Tullahoma campaign has been fought to a finish. On
ostensible recruiting service, but really for participation in the
momentous Brough-Vallandigham campaign in Ohio, the opportunity is
afforded me to go home for a brief season. I avail myself of it, and
take proudly home to show to friends the gift of comrades beloved.

The duty in the north performed, I turn south to rejoin the command.
The military situation is most interesting. Like the sharp end of
a lance, the western army has pierced into the very vitals of the
Confederacy. Rosecrans has won his objective, Chattanooga; paying
therefor the bloody penalty of Chickamauga, but is practically besieged
by an enemy whose camp fires light the many miles of horizon, from
where the crouching lion of lofty Lookout Mountain, with extended paws,
touches the Tennessee, around the semi-circle of frowning ridges to
where the strongly intrenched line again touches the deep flowing river
at Tunnel Hill. He is relieved from command by the powers that be, and
Thomas, the reliable, the Rock of Chickamauga, beloved of all men,
takes his place as chief. He declares his intention to hold his great
strategic position “until we starve,” and unless help comes, starvation
seems probable.

[Illustration: GENERAL GEORGE H. THOMAS

“The Rock of Chickamauga.”]

Hooker is on his way from the east with two corps of veterans of the
Potomac, and Sherman marches to us with the victorious columns, flushed
with the capture of Vicksburg, from the banks of the Mississippi.
The great Captain, with the fame of Fort Donelson and Shiloh, comes
also, to assume supreme command. Grant! Sherman! Thomas! Behold the
triumvirate! Truly, the great game of war is now to be played by
experts. I hasten to take place as one of the pawns.




SCENE III.

THE CAPTURE.


Where the fight was the fiercest at Stone’s River, Captain Keel, of
ours, in gallant leadership of his company, was shot in the elbow of
his right arm. Surgical skill had prevented amputation and obtained
exsection, resulting in a cartilaginous elbow and sorely crippled hand.
Thus maimed, he came to me at Nashville and declared his intention of
reporting for duty. Condemning his judgment, but admiring his pluck, I
said, “All right, Captain, we will take the first train for the front.”

We reached Stevenson, Alabama, the end of our ride over rough and
worn pieces of iron, dignified by the name of railroad. From there a
mountain wagon road formed the connection with the army at Chattanooga.
Its course could be traced by the fragments of broken wagons, abandoned
stores, and by the carcasses of the poor mules, strangled in the mud of
it. Trains laden with ammunition, food and forage started daily from
Stevenson. The time of their arrival, at the end of the pontoon bridge
across from Chattanooga was an unknown quantity. It was at least two
and more frequently four days.

My anxiety to reach the regiment was intense. Upon inquiry I heard of a
bridle path leading over the mountain and along the bank of the river.
By starting early and riding hard, one might get through in a day, but
it was the path of danger. The guns of the Confederates commanded this
road, and some of our men had been killed, others wounded and captured,
who tried it. I determined to make the effort. The Colonel commanding
the post, in response to my earnest appeal, loaned me two horses and an
orderly, and we started at the first peep of day.

Keel, too greatly disabled to ride a horse, was to go by the wagon
road, taking the baggage of both. He evinced no reluctance when he
found that as companions in the same wagon he was to have two estimable
women of the Christian Commission, who, with supplies for the sick and
wounded, were bound to Chattanooga upon their heaven inspired mission.

Realizing that my route was hazardous, I put on my oldest uniform,
stripped myself of all valuables, packing them carefully in the trunk
that contained all of my earthly possessions. Determined that my
beloved pistols should not fall into the hands of the enemy, I lodged
them securely in my trunk, taking in their stead a pair of common
holster revolvers.

The orderly and I rode through without mishap, receiving no shot and
seeing but few of the enemy. Arrived at regimental headquarters, I
found all well, and received a welcome home that thrilled me. I waited,
somewhat impatiently, for the disabled Captain to arrive with the
baggage so greatly needed.

The days passed away and gave no sign of him until the fifth after my
arrival, when a sorry figure rode to the front of my tent. Seated upon
a mule that had upon him parts of wagon harness, was the Captain, a
woful figure, with rueful countenance. Don Quixote appeared not so
disconsolate even after his battle with the knights of the windmill. We
would have laughed aloud at his sorry plight had his aspect not been
so serious. “For God’s sake, food and drink!” he cried. Being properly
refreshed, he told his tale of woe. The train of wagons was proceeding
slowly along the weary road, when sharp firing at its front evidenced
an attack. Wheeler’s cavalry had crossed the river and was on one of
the raids in our rear that made the name of General Joe Wheeler one
with which to scare teamsters and worry commanders.

The Captain was a man of proper gallantry, a fitting squire of dames,
but, withal, not lacking in judicious discretion. The Confederate
troopers certainly would not molest the women, bent upon their
righteous mission, but to him captivity meant worse than death. Making
hasty excuses, in unceremonious fashion, he jumped from the wagon,
pulled a colored teamster off of a mule that he had just cut out of the
traces of a wagon, mounted and took quickly to the woods on the side
of the mountain. As he plunged deeper into the thicket, he saw in the
valley the light of burning wagons, and heard the terrific explosions
of ammunition with which many of them were loaded. After days and
nights of distress he at last found his way to our camps.

A day or two after, hearing that the female companions of the good
captain had reached our lines, I called upon them in the town and heard
the rest of the story. Wheeler’s rough riders had treated them with
courteous consideration and did not molest their trunks when told that
they contained only woman’s apparel. Keel’s baggage and my own was
evidently rich booty. The new uniforms were seized with delight, and
my precious seven-shooters appropriated with exclamations of joy and
admiration. Taking what was wanted, the residue was thrown back on the
wagons, that had been run and piled together, and made food for the
flames. The train was but partly consumed when our cavalry appeared
upon the scene and a sharp fight ensued, with the result that the women
were released from their unpleasant situation.

While the beleaguered army in Chattanooga, foregoing, if not
forgetting, the pangs of hunger, echoed the language of Thomas in his
telegram to Grant, “We will hold this place until we starve,” it was
with right good will that it marched out in front of its works on an
eventful November morning, being ordered to make a “demonstration” and
relieve the pressure on Sherman in his effort to take Tunnel Hill,
the right flank of the semi-circular natural defense of the enemy,
composed of Missionary Ridge, with its crest from five hundred to eight
hundred feet above us, around to Lookout on the left with its proud
head over two thousand feet above the town. It was a crescent, with
defensive works erected with engineering skill, bristling with guns and
reflecting threatening lights as the sun played upon the musket barrels
and bayonets in the hands of skilled and brave defenders. It looked
like the curve of the cutting edge of a huge scimitar.

[Illustration: MAP OF THE BATTLEFIELD OF CHATTANOOGA SHOWING THE
POSITION OF THE CONFEDERATE ARMY AT LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND MISSION RIDGE.]

A feeling of amity, almost of fraternization, had existed between the
picket lines in front of Wood’s division for many days. In the early
morning of that day, being in charge of the left of our picket line,
I received a turn-out and salute from the Confederate reserve as
I rode the line. But the friendly relation was soon to be rudely
disturbed. My pickets, composed of the 19th Ohio and the 9th Kentucky,
became the line of skirmishers. Our troops being well out of their
works, we advanced with our left resting on Citico Creek, and I believe
that from these regiments came the first shots in that glorious advance
that resulted in the taking of Orchard Knob, the key of the enemy’s
position.

With impatient joy they witnessed the stars and stripes on Lookout’s
crest, and heard the guns of Hooker on the enemy’s left. The evidences
of the hard fighting by Sherman and the stubborn resistance Bragg’s
right was giving him were borne on every wind. The flanking assaults
upon the Ridge were not achieving success. There must be another
“demonstration” by the center. Grant stands on Orchard Knob, silently
smoking the inevitable cigar. He sees the heavy work to the right and
left and that the waning day is showing its lengthening shadows. The
center must again relieve the pressure. To Thomas goes the order: “Take
the rifle-pits at the foot of the ridge. At the six-gun signal from
Orchard Knob, advance the lines to the attack.” Baird, Wood, Sheridan
and Johnson were quickly in the order named from left to right.

Restlessly they await the signal. It is well on to four o’clock. At
last the sharp report of a cannon from the Knob! Another! and another!
and in quick succession the six have thundered forth the order for the
charge.

To your feet and forward, men of the Cumberland! “Take the rifle-pits
at the foot of the ridge,” is the order. How splendidly they respond.
Adding emphasis to their loud huzzas is the noise of the light
artillery on the plain and the deep roar of the big siege guns in the
forts of Chattanooga. The crest of the ridge throws its full weight of
metal at the lines of blue. The musketry fire from the pits is full in
their faces. But neither shot nor shell can stop the impetuous advance.
On and on they go, surmounting every obstacle.

The order is obeyed.

The rifle-pits are ours and their late defenders our prisoners. How the
grey jackets hasten to the rear. We wonder at their haste, but soon
understood it when the guns of the ridge, depressed to sweep the pits,
seemed to open the gates of hell itself upon us.

We cannot stay. Must we fall back? Perish the thought. No! No! No
order given, and yet to every man the impulse. Forward the whole line!
To the crest of the ridge and take the guns! Every man forward!

Grape and canister from fifty cannon forbid the advance. Wood,
Sheridan, Baird, Johnson, Willich, Hazen, Beatty, Carlin, Turchin,
Vanderveer, catching the spirit from the men, shout, “Up, boys! To the
top!” and grape and canister, wounds and death are forgotten.

On and on and up and up we go, “while all the world wondered.” Grant
turns to Thomas, and, with distress if not anger in his voice, says,
“Who ordered those men up the ridge?” Replies our old hero, “I don’t
know, I did not.” Says Grant, “Granger, did you?” “No,” says Granger,
“they started without orders. When those fellows get started, all
hell can’t stop them.”

With hearts in their throats these anxious chieftains watch. The
spectators in Chattanooga hold their breath in terrible suspense. It
looks a desperate venture, a foolhardy effort. Can they make the top,
or will they be driven back to the plain, with columns broken and ranks
disordered?

The musketry fire from the intrenched line in grey is murderous. The
cannon belch forth incessantly.

“It is as though men fought upon the earth and fiends in the upper air.”

Not a shot from the wedge-shaped lines in blue as they advance with the
colors of regiments at the apex of the triangles. Sixty regiments in
rivalry for the lead! Colors fall as their bearers sink in death, but
other stout arms nerved by brave hearts bear the flag aloft.

Ah! the lines waver! they cannot make it! But repulse means defeat and
loss of all we have gained.

Look! again they go forward! Will they reach the crest? See! the
answer! A flag! the nation’s flag! Our flag upon the top! Another, and
yet another! The crest breaks out in glory! It is the apotheosis of the
banner of the free!

The rebel lines are broken! We are into their works! Cheer upon cheer
“set the wild echoes flying” from Tunnel Hill to Lookout! They tell of
victory! glorious, exultant victory.

Forty pieces of cannon and 7,000 stand of arms with 6,000 prisoners
captured give emphasis to the story.

[Illustration: GENERAL GEORGE H. THOMAS AND STAFF AFTER THE BATTLE OF
MISSION RIDGE.]

The bars are down for entrance next campaign to Atlanta, gate city of
the South.

I went through the starvation siege of Chattanooga, the battles of
Orchard Knob and Mission Ridge, and the winter march to relieve
Burnside, who was penned up in Knoxville, in very uncomfortable plight,
depending upon my brother officers for the clothing to keep me warm,
but that which caused me the most distress was the loss, as I naturally
supposed, forever, of the twin revolvers that rest now so peacefully
before us, reminders of a time of great happenings by the side of which
all else in life seems of trifling importance.




SCENE IV.

THE REUNION.


[Illustration: “UPON THE WALL HUNG THE GOOD SWORD, WITH THE DENT IN ITS
SCABBARD.”]

Twenty years passed away, with their changes for good and for ill. The
great war seemed like a dream, and its events were dim and shadowy. But
there remained to me some substantial evidence of its reality. Upon
the wall hung the good sword, with the dent in its scabbard telling of
the death struggle of the brave black mare, whose name should be on
Stone River’s roll of honor. In the corner stood the regimental flag,
presented by my comrades when we parted in 1865, the deep scar upon its
staff matching the deeper scar upon the manly breast of its bearer
“in the brave days of old.” I looked at them and longed for the twin
seven-shooters that should keep them company.

[Illustration: “IN THE CORNER STOOD THE REGIMENTAL FLAG PRESENTED BY MY
COMRADES WHEN WE PARTED IN 1865. THE DEEP SCAR UPON ITS STAFF MATCHED
THE DEEPER SCAR UPON THE MANLY BREAST OF ITS BEARER IN THE BRAVE DAYS
OF OLD.”]

Representing my adopted State, Nebraska, in the Senate, I had reached a
position that had at least given my name notoriety. It chanced that the
Major of an Iowa cavalry regiment saw it in the public prints and was
prompted to write me. “Are you,” said he, “the man who commanded the
19th Ohio during the war? If so, I have a pistol that must belong to
you, for the fact of its presentation is engraved upon it.” I am quick
to respond, and in brief time there came the pistol, as welcome to my
hand and heart as an old-time friend.

He wrote me its history. During the days of the period of
reconstruction he was on duty in Alabama, and upon the person of a man
whom he arrested was found the revolver. The Major took it from him
and had held it since, hoping that some time he might meet the owner.
Hearty thanks went to him, and I longed all the more for its mate,
somewhere existing, but probably never to be recovered by me.

Twenty-eight years elapse after the cavalry raid in the Sequatchie
Valley. The Congress is in session and a dreary debate drags its
weary length through the hours. My yawning presence in the Senate
Chamber would only add emphasis to the dullness there, and I go to the
Committee Room, to engage in the usual employment of a Congressman’s
spare hours, the dictation of replies to the endless letters, from
every direction, on every conceivable subject. There comes a messenger,
and this his message: “The compliments of Senator Pugh of Alabama, who
requests the pleasure of seeing you in the Marble Room.” I respond
quickly to the call, and go to the room of simplicity and beauty that
is one of the chief attractions under the great white dome. Near at
hand are three men, two of them well known by me, the third a stranger.

[Illustration: GENERAL JOSEPH WHEELER

“The Marshal Ney of the Confederacy.”]

I hasten to greet my colleague, and then shake hands with warmth of
greeting with a gentleman I have grown to respect and like. It is
General Wheeler, once a dashing cavalry leader of Confederates, he
who harried our rear so persistently and pronouncedly; reconstructed
into a leader in forensic debate, an authority on parliamentary law,
and an all-around legislator, whose trenchant pen was surely as mighty
as his vigorous sword. Cuba and the Philippines are the scenes of his
later triumphs, and there is no name upon the Army Roll more honored
now for patriotic devotion and soldierly ability than that of him who,
during the dark days of the civil strife, was the Marshal Ney of the
Confederacy.

I am introduced by the courtly Senator Pugh to his esteemed
constituent, ex-Confederate Colonel Reeves, of Alabama. I greet him
with pleasure, for he bears upon him those evidences that command
respect. Both appearance and speech declare the Southerner, and the
soft broad accents fall pleasingly upon the ear. He said, “I think,
sir, I have something that once belonged to you, and will give it to
you with pleasure, for I presume from the inscription upon it you will
prize it highly.”

He produces the long-lost revolver and tells its story. He bought it
and its companion from one of General Wheeler’s troopers, who said
he captured it at the battle of Mission Ridge. I mildly suggest
that at Mission Ridge the captures were on the other side. He smiled
acquiescence and said he cared little at the time of purchase from
whence they came, so that they might be his. He had carried them
through the war until a fearful wound had disabled him from further
field duty.

After the war he had loaned one to the sheriff of his county and from
him it had been captured by some of our troops. I told him of the
return of that one to me eight years before. We exchange reminiscences
of the great struggle. We compare experiences. Enemies in war, we are
in peace friends.

Handling his revolver with easy grace and caressing gesture, he
makes it mine again, saying as he passes it to me, with pardonable
reluctance, “I tell you, sir, that is a mighty close shooting pistol.”
I cordially agree to that sentiment, and we both dwell in thought upon
the career of these messengers of death that have fought beneath two
flags, giving loyal support to their masters, who have fought each one
loyally for his own.

And thus finding each other, after a quarter of a century of
separation, they came back to me, to be cherished fondly and I hope
never again to be used.




EPILOGUE.


And so my friend, you have the truthful story. It is not one to excite
special wonder, but causes, I take it, emotions of pleasure and
thankfulness.

As the pistols have come peacefully together, so have north and south
united in fraternity and in devotion to one flag and a common country.
The war taught mutual respect, and never again can there come between
these sections the hatred, based upon mutual misunderstandings, that
led to the attempt at dismemberment. The men who did the fighting
during those four years of bloody war can have no sympathy with the
incendiaries who would array section against section upon any subject.
Their motto is bear and forbear. The disposition to fraternize was
strong among them even during the strife, and with them now is the
brotherhood that is the inevitable incident of unity of national
purpose and a patriotic desire for one destiny.

Long ago, while condemning the false teaching that led to the belief
that allegiance was to the State, we appreciated how deep abiding was
the honest conviction of those who, taught in a different school from
us, made untold sacrifice for the cause they espoused.

Forgetting nothing of the past--the cruel blow at nationality, the
unhallowed attack upon the flag, with all the sad results of weeping
and wounds, of desolation and death--we have forgiven everything.

Full citizenship, with all of honor, of governing power, and
controlling rights that the term imports, has been accorded to all who
participated or lent aid and comfort to the enemies of the Union.

As the victors and the vanquished have recognized equal courage and
even powers of endurance, there has come mutual respect. Through the
throes and labor of reconstruction, with the contact of peoples, the
interchange of commerce, the common interests of the different parts of
the national whole, the dovetailing of States through the construction
of the iron highways of trade, and mutual contribution of the capital
needed for the development of the new South has come peaceful,
contented reconciliation. The years that gather wisdom and experience
to all long ago taught the lesson even to those who fought for it,
that the cause for which they struggled and suffered was better lost
than won.

Hail the epoch of concord! All hail, the era of fraternity!

Let us close the lid of the mahogany box, believing that the pair
snugly ensconced within it shall never serve save as polished reminders
of other days.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


Extraneous quotation mark on page 11 removed.

Corrected typo in illustration caption “battlelield” to “battlefield”.

Normalized punctuation in illustration caption “CHARGE OF GENERAL....”

Positions of illustrations re-arranged to support the main text.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWIN SEVEN-SHOOTERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


